Torture and other ill-treatment
Reports of ill-treatment by law enforcement officials continued. There were no effective mechanisms established to prevent ill-treatment by police. Nor were concrete measures taken to ensure proper investigations and, where appropriate, prosecution of all law enforcement agents involved in human rights violations.
The authorities failed to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and to establish an independent National Preventive Mechanism for the prevention of torture and other ill-treatment at the domestic level. Torture was also not incorporated as a specific offence in ordinary criminal legislation.192 
Genoa G8 trials
Appeals against the second instance verdicts, issued by the Genoa Court of Appeal in the trials of law enforcement officials, medical personnel and prison officers for the ill-treatment of protesters at the 2001
Genoa G8 summit, were still pending before the Court of Cassation. 
In March, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that there was no violation of the right to life in relation to the death of protester Carlo Giuliani on the streets of Genoa on 20 July 2001. In May 2003, the inquiry into his fatal shooting by a law enforcement officer had ended with the judge of the preliminary investigation ruling that the officer had acted in self- defence and should not be charged.
Deaths in custody 
In June, the Bologna Court of Appeal confirmed the first instance guilty verdict against four police officers for the unlawful killing of 18-year-old Federico
Aldrovandi. Owing to the application of a law on pardon, the initial sentence of three years and six months was commuted to six months only. Federico Aldrovandi died in 2005 after being stopped by police officers in Ferrara. Appeals were filed before the Court of
Cassation. In May, one of three police officers who had been sentenced in 2010 to prison terms of eight, 10 and 12 months respectively for helping to throw the inquiry off track, was also given a suspended sentence of a further three months. In January, a fourth police officer was acquitted of charges of involvement in deflecting the investigations. 
In March, the trial against a prison guard for failing to assist Aldo Bianzino and other criminal offences, began. Aldo Bianzino died in prison in Perugia in 2007 two days after his arrest. Proceedings for homicide against unidentified perpetrators were closed in 2009. 
The trial in relation to the death of Stefano Cucchi was ongoing. Six doctors, three nurses and three prison officers stood accused of various criminal offences, including abuse of authority and abuse of office, bodily harm and failure to offer assistance. In January, a high- level official in the prison service was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for falsifying official documents and for abuse of office. Stefano Cucchi died in October2009  in a hospital’s prison wing in Rome several days after his arrest. 
Investigations were still ongoing into allegations of ill- treatment suffered by Giuseppe Uva while in police custody hours before his death. He died in June 2008 in a hospital in Varese. The trial against a doctor for his manslaughter, allegedly due to wrong medical treatment, was ongoing. In December, the body of
Giuseppe Uva was exhumed to undergo further forensic examination.
Amnesty International visits/reports 
Amnesty International delegates visited Italy in March, April, July and
November. 
Current evidence: European complicity in the CIA rendition and secret detention programmes (EUR 01/001/2011) 
Italy: Amnesty International findings and recommendations to the
Italian authorities following the research visit to Lampedusa andMineo(EUR 30/007/2011) 
Italy: “Zero tolerance for Roma”: Forced evictions and discrimination against Roma in Milan (EUR 30/020/2011)
