Torture and other ill-treatment
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment in the aftermath of the June violence continued throughout2011. 
The authorities acknowledged that torture and ill-treatment in detention was a problem.
In April, a new Prosecutor General was appointed.
She soon issued a directive requiring all reports and complaints of torture to be immediately investigated and all places of detention to be inspected regularly and without notice. In September, she issued detailed instructions on the methodology of investigating torture. Human rights organizations and the
Ombudsman’s Office co-operated with the OSCE in order to set up independent detention monitoring groups throughout the country with the right of unimpeded access to all detention facilities. The groups started operating in August.
The then President and the new Prosecutor
General made repeated efforts to stop the routine use of beatings and other ill-treatment in order to extract confessions. However, at regional and local levels there appeared little commitment to effectively address and prevent these serious human rights violations. The KIC concluded that “acts of torture were committed in detention centres by the209Amnesty 
International Report 2012
authorities of Kyrgyzstan in the aftermath of the June events... [S]uch acts of torture are ongoing and … the response of the authorities to allegations of torture has been grossly inadequate.”
There were serious concerns that while investigating crimes, police officers continued to disproportionately target Uzbeks and Uzbek neighbourhoods, threatening to lay charges of serious crimes, such as murder, in relation to the June violence in order to extort money from them. At least two ethnic Uzbeks died in police custody reportedly from torture. 
Usmonzhon Kholmirzaev, an ethnic Uzbek Russian citizen, died on 9 August, reportedly as a result of torture, two days after he was arbitrarily detained in
Bazar-Korgan by plain-clothes police officers and taken to the local police station. He told his wife a gas mask had been put over his face and he had been beaten.
When he collapsed, one of the officers reportedly kneed him in the chest two or three times until he lost consciousness. The police threatened that if he did not pay them US$6,000, they would charge him with violent crimes in relation to the June 2010 violence. He was eventually released after his family gave the officers
US$680. He was hospitalized the next morning and died of his injuries a day later. His wife said that he had told her that the officers were responsible for his injuries. His wife and her lawyer, who were present at his autopsy, reported that the forensic examination found that he had died of internal haemorrhaging.
Following an official request from the Russian consulate, the prosecutor of Jalal-Abad opened a criminal case in August against four police officers with several charges, including torture.
The government renewed its invitation to the
UN Special Rapporteur on torture and he visited the country in December. He concluded that the use of torture and ill-treatment was widespread for the purpose of extracting confessions. Torture methods included “being subjected to asphyxiation through plastic bags and gas masks, punched, beaten… and applied electric shocks… during arrest and first hours of informal interrogation.” Conditions of detention ranged from “adequate to dreadful”.
