Torture and other ill-treatment
Individuals arrested and detained by al-Gaddafi forces were tortured or ill-treated, particularly upon capture and during initial interrogations. Detainees were beaten with belts, whips, metal wires and rubber hoses; suspended in contorted positions for prolonged periods; and denied medical treatment, including for injuries sustained as a result of torture or shooting. Some were tortured with electric shocks.
Several were shot after being apprehended and while posing no threat. Some were left to suffocate in metal containers. 
On 6 June, guards ignored pleas for water and air by detainees held in two metal containers in al-Khums; 19 suffocated to death.
Several male detainees were raped by their captors or guards. 
A 50-year-old man was arrested by al-Gaddafi forces while receiving treatment at Tajoura Heart Hospital in Tripoli in late February. At Ain Zara Prison, also in
Tripoli, he was kicked, hit with sticks and rifle butts, given electric shocks and tied to a tree. While in custody, he was raped twice using implements.
Allegations of rape by al-Gaddafi forces were widely reported by NTC supporters, and some women detained by pro-NTC forces in al-Zawiya, Tripoli and
Misratah alleged they had been sexually abused. 
Eman al-Obeidi told international journalists on26 
March that she had been raped by soldiers loyal to
Colonel al-Gaddafi. After periods of being detained by al-Gaddafi forces, she was released and fled Libya in May.
She was forcibly returned from Qatar to Benghazi in June, but was later allowed to leave NTC-controlled territory.
In areas controlled by the NTC before as well as after August, when Tripoli fell to the forces opposing
Colonel al-Gaddafi, militias in control of detention centres tortured or ill-treated detainees with impunity, seemingly to punish them for alleged crimes or to extract “confessions”. The most commonly reported methods included beatings all over the body with belts, sticks, rifle butts and rubber hoses; punching; kicking; and death threats. Individuals with dark skin, whether Libyan or foreign nationals, were especially vulnerable to abuse. 
A 17-year-old migrant worker from Chad was taken from his home in August by armed men who handcuffed and slapped him and dragged him along the ground before detaining him at a school that they were using as a detention facility. There, he was219Amnesty 
International Report 2012
punched and beaten with sticks, belts, rifles and rubber cables, mostly on the head, face and back. The torture only stopped when he agreed to “confess” to killing civilians and raping women.
Several detainees died in the custody of militias in circumstances suggesting that torture contributed to or caused their death. 
Abdelhakim Milad Jum’a Qalhud, a school director from the town of al-Qarabuli, east of Tripoli, was detained at his home on 16 October by a local militia.
In the following days he was seen twice by doctors who noticed multiple bruises on his body and urged his hospitalization. However, the militia ignored the medical advice and on 25 October the body of
Abdelhakim Milad Jum’a Qalhud was delivered to the local hospital. The forensic report suggested that he had died as a result of beatings with an instrument. No effective investigation into the circumstances of his death was initiated.
