Torture and other ill-treatment
In July, the UN Human Rights Committee discussed
Kazakhstan’s report on implementing the ICCPR.
It regretted that Kazakhstan had not made more progress in eliminating torture and questioned the political will of the authorities to fulfil their commitments, especially in initiating effective investigations into allegations of torture or other ill- treatment. In the same month, in a retrograde move, the President signed a decree authorizing the transfer of the prison system back to the authority of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs, thereby defeating years of reform efforts by government and NGOs. Access by public monitors to prisons and pre-trial detention centres had greatly improved since their transfer to the authority of the Ministry of Justice in 2004. In contrast, access to police cells and other places of detention under the authority of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs remained problematic and most allegations of torture continued to be received from there. 
Nikolai Maier, aged 21, and four of his friends were reportedly attacked by 15 police officers while they were sitting in the courtyard of his apartment block in
Rudni on 25 July. Eyewitnesses stated that the police officers hit the young men with rubber batons and kicked them. Nikolai Maier lost consciousness. All five men were then detained at the police station. Nikolai
Maier was charged with endangering the life and health of law enforcement officers. The following morning,
Nikolai Maier was taken to hospital and diagnosed with concussion, and head, eye and thigh injuries. He was placed under house arrest. Despite medical evidence and numerous complaints from his family and their lawyer, the Prosecutor’s Office made no investigation into the allegations of torture and ill-treatment by the police. The Kostanai Regional Internal Affairs
Department found that the use of force by the police officers was justified. The trial started in November and no verdict had been reached at the end of December. 
Following the violence in Zhanaozen on16 
December, released detainees and relatives of detainees reported that scores of people, including young women, had been rounded up and kept incommunicado in overcrowded cells in police custody.
They claimed the detainees had been stripped naked, beaten, kicked, and doused with cold water. Journalists199Amnesty 
International Report 2012
reported hearing screams coming from interrogation rooms in police stations. However, without access, independent monitors found it difficult to verify the allegations. At least one man was alleged to have died as a result of the torture he was subjected to in police custody.
