Torture and other ill-treatment
There were allegations of excessive use of force by law enforcement officials during demonstrations by the 15M movement across Spain between May and August. 
On 27 May, riot police officers of the autonomous
Catalan police force intervened to disperse demonstrators from Catalonia Square in Barcelona.
Medical evidence and video footage corroborated reports that riot police hit apparently peaceful demonstrators with their batons and fired rubber bullets at them. The police officers did not appear to wear identification numbers on their uniform. On8 
June, the Catalan government stated that no inquiry into the allegations of excessive use of force was necessary. 
Angela Jaramillo reported that while she stood alone, close to the demonstration in Calle Castellana in Madrid on 4 August, a riot police officer hit her in the face and on the legs. Another woman who assisted Angela
Jaramillo said she was also repeatedly hit with batons by riot police and suffered injuries on her neck, hip and legs. Both filed complaints against the police the following day. 
On 17 October, the High Court of Barcelona sentenced two municipal police officers to 27 months’ imprisonment for the torture of a student from Trinidad and Tobago in September 2006. The same two police officers had been involved in another incident earlier in2006,  and three other men had filed complaints of ill- treatment against them, but investigations into those allegations had been closed in July 2007.
In January, the Catalan government abolished the
Code of Police Ethics, which had implemented the
European Code of Police Ethics. The Police Ethics
Committee, which was mandated to receive and examine complaints from individuals about police conduct and to assess police compliance with the
Code of Police Ethics, was suspended after most of its members resigned. 
At the end of the year, two police officers, charged with killing Osamuyia Akpitaye while he was being forcibly deported from Spain in June 2007, had not been put on trial. 
In November, the Supreme Court acquitted four civil guards convicted by the Criminal Court of Guipúzcoa in
December 2010 for torturing Igor Portu and Mattin
Sarasola while they were in police custody on 6 January2008.311Amnesty 
International Report 2012
 Ali Aarrass, a Moroccan/Belgian national suspected of terrorism-related offences in Morocco, was sentenced to 15 years’ imprisonment in Rabat in
November. He had been extradited from Spain to
Morocco in December 2010 in breach of interim measures ordered by the UN Human Rights Committee, after which his lawyers in Belgium repeatedly alleged that the Moroccan security services tortured him during interrogation and that he did not receive a fair trial. A complaint before the Human Rights Committee against
Spain was still pending at the end of the year. 
Mohamed Zaher Asade and Hasan Alhusein, two
Syrian nationals released from prison in September2010  after completing eight-year sentences for terrorism-related offences, remained under threat of expulsion to Syria despite facing a real risk of torture or other ill-treatment there. Mohamed Zaher Asade had lodged an appeal against his expulsion, but his request to suspend the enforcement of his expulsion pending a final decision was dismissed. An expulsion order issued against Hasan Alhusein in August was pending at the end of the year.
