Torture and other ill-treatment
Allegations of torture and other ill-treatment in immigration detention facilities and police stations, during arrest and/or detention, persisted.
A law was enacted in January to pave the way for a police complaints mechanism. Concerns remained, however, over the office’s independence and effectiveness of mandate. 
In December, the Mixed Jury Court of Athens found a former police officer guilty of torturing two young men on separate occasions with an electric shock device in
August 2002 at the Aspropyrgos police station. The
Court handed down a six-year prison sentence, suspended on appeal. 
In December, two police officers were found guilty of causing bodily harm under the torture provision of the
Criminal Code to two refugees in Aghios Panteleimon,
Athens in December 2004. The officers were also found guilty for causing unprovoked bodily harm to five other Afghans. One officer was sentenced to five years and five months imprisonment and the other, five years.
Both sentences were suspended on appeal. Concerns were expressed by NGOs that the Court had converted the original charge of torture in relation to the treatment of the two refugees to the lesser offence of violations against human dignity proscribed under the torture provision.
There was a large a number of allegations of ill-treatment by police during demonstrations.
In April, police withdrew from the town of Keratea where clashes between police and residents protesting against the creation of a landfill site had been ongoing since December 2010. There were reports of excessive use of tear gas and other chemicals by the police, and allegations of ill- treatment of town residents. The authorities also reported a large number of injuries to police officers.
There were mounting allegations of excessive use of force, including the use of chemicals, by police during the anti-austerity demonstrations that took place during the year. On several occasions, the otherwise peaceful demonstrations became violent when a minority of rioters clashed with police. Video footage, pictures, press reports and witness testimonies pointed to the repeated use of excessive force by police in the demonstrations in Athens on15, 28  and 29 June, including the extensive use of chemicals, against largely peaceful protesters. A criminal investigation was ordered by the Athens
Prosecutor’s Office into the allegations. 
On 11 May, riot police reportedly used excessive force and chemicals against a large number of peaceful protesters, in Panepistimiou Street in Athens. More than 30 protesters sought hospital treatment, mainly for head injuries, including two who were seriously injured and required further hospital treatment. A criminal investigation began into the case of Yiannis Kafkas, one of the protesters seriously injured. 
Manolis Kypraios, a journalist, suffered total loss of hearing after a riot police officer threw a stun grenade in front of him while he was covering the demonstration in Athens on 15 June. A criminal and disciplinary investigation began into his case. At the end of the year, the Athens Prosecutor’s Office filed charges against as yet unidentified police officers for intentionally causing the journalist serious bodily harm.
